---
title: "How to Create an API with FastAPI"
---

Lets start by covering some important definitions.

API stands for Application Programming Interface. It allows us to define how we want clients to interact with our application. 

In this tutorial, we'll be creating a web API. That's an API that uses Hypertext Transfer Protocol (HTTP) to transport data.

• HTTP is a communication protocol used to exchange different media types over a network. This article will provide examples for the four most common HTTP methods:
• GET: Returns info about the requested resource\
• POST: Creates a new resource\
• PUT: Performs a full update by replacing a resource\
• DELETE: Removes a resource\

APIS are useful for allowing microservices to communicate with each other. We can specify rules for interacting with each microservice in the API documentation. 

The API documentation is essentially the decription of the API and it's created following a standard interface description language such as Open API for REST APIs

Why FastAPI?
Fast API has three main benefits:
1. Auto validation (normally you have to code the data validation yourself)
2. Automatically generate documentation that also allows you to test your API
3. Improved auto-completion because you're defining types

Alright, now we're ready to create our own!

Start by importing the class FastAPI from the fastapi library.

```
from fastapi import FastAPI
```

Next, initialize our API by creating an app object by calling the FastAPI constructor.

```
app = FastAPI()
```

We're ready to write our first endpoint! An endpoint is the final stop on the path from the domain name. The root endpoint is the first stop on that path.

```
@app.get("/")
def read_root():
 return {"message": "Welcome to the app!"}
```

Let's break that down. First, we're using the @ sign to create a decorator. A decorator is a function that takes in another function as input and modifies it without modifying the original source code. 

```
@
```

Next, we're feeding it the app object we created earlier, followed by a dot and the HTTP endpoint we want to call. In this case, it's the GET method.

```
@app.get
```

Finally, we're feeding the decorator the path to our endpoint as a parameter. That's' "/" for root.

```
@app.get("/")
```

Now we need to feed the decorator the function we want to modify. We'll do that by defining a function called read_root that will retrieve the contents of the page at "/" for us. In this case the content of the page will be a message we create in a python dictionary. FastAPI will translate our python dictionary into JSON, which is the format web app requests and responses are typically sent in. This feature speeds up development because it allows us to do all of our work in python.

```
def read_root():
 return {"message": "Welcome to the app!"}
 ```

Leaving us with the finished product:

```
@app.get("/")
def read_root():
 return {"message": "Welcome to the app!"}
```

Congratulations! You just made your first endpoint. Why stop there? Let's create more endpoints for each of the four HTTP methods we covered earlier by creating an inventory app.

In order to do so, we'll have to create an inventory and create a blueprint for what kind of items can be added to it. We can do the latter by creating an item class using a pydantic model. FastAPI uses pydantic to automatically validate the request body a client sends to a server to make sure the API can process it. We can define our own by creating an item class using pydantic's BaseModel. 

First, we need to return to the top of our program and import the BaseModel class from pydantic.

```
from pydantic import BaseModel
```

Next, we need to define a class for our items.

```
class Item(BaseModel):
    name: str
    price: float
    description: Optional[str] = None
```

In the snippet above, we are creating a class called Item and feeding it pydantic's BaeModel class as a parameter.

```
class Item(BaseModel):
```

Now let's define the characteristics of the items in our inventory. They will need a name of type string, a price of type float, and may include an optional description.

```
    name: str
    price: float
    description: Optional[str] = None
```

Defining the type of those item characteristics provides us with some benefits. Firstly, it improves auto-completion within our IDE. Try it out without the type specified and you'll notice that the IDE gives you less accurate suggestions. This makes development go a little faster. Secondly, it allows pydantic to validate the request bodies from the clients of the API. If a user inputs a name that isn't a string, they will receive an error. This speeds development up because we do not need to write the data validation ourselves. 

You'll notice that the description looks different from the other two characteristics of the item. That's because it's optional.

```
description: Optional[str] = None
```

This is essentially the same as this.

```
description: str = None
```

Both are setting the default value to None. This means that if we do not pass it a value for description, it will automatically assign it a value of None. This allows it to be considered "optional" (although it will always get passed, even when the value is set to None) by the end user.

So why do it the first way? The answer is better auto-completion. By using the Optional class from the typing library, we get more accurate suggestions for auto-completion within our IDE. In order to do so, we have to return to the top of our file and import the Optional class from the typing library.

```
from typing import Optional
```

Now our file should look like this:

```
from fastapi import FastAPI
from typing import Optional

# Initialize our API by creating an app object by calling the FastAPI constructor
app = FastAPI()

# Create a root endpoint
@app.get("/")
def read_root():
 return {"message": "Welcome to the app!"}

# Creaet an Item class
class Item(BaseModel):
    name: str
    price: float
    description: Optional[str] = None
```

Great! Next, we want to create an inventory to store our items in. For this demo, we'll be using an in-memory data store. However, in production you would want to use some kind of database. We can create our in-memory data store by defining an empty dictionary called inventory.

```
inventory = {}
```

Now we're ready to create the rest of our endpoints. We'll start with the GET method again and use it to highlight some important features in FastAPI. FastAPI allows us to use parameters to modify our endpoints. We can use path parameters to identify a specific resource and query parameters to sort, filter, or represent the current page number in a collection. Query parameters are optional parameters that are attached to the end of a URL after a question mark. They are separated by the ampersand (&) symbol if there are multiple parameters. Path parameters are mandatory when included and are specified using curly brackets {}. Let's create another endpoint using path and query parameters.

```
@app.get("/get-item/{item_id}")
def get_item(item_id: int, name: Optional[str] = None):
    if item_id not in inventory:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=404, detail="Item ID not found.")
    if name and inventory[item_id].name != name:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=404, detail="Item name not found.")
    
    return inventory[item_id]
```

Alright, let's break that down. Once again, we are defining a decorator using the @ sign and specifying the app object we created earlier. That is followed by a dot and the HTTP method we want to call. In this case, that's GET. However, this time we are feeding it a descriptive path "get-item/" followed by a path parameter called {item_id} which we will define in the following function.

```
@app.get("/get-item/{item_id}")
```

Next, we'll feed the decorator a function called get_item and defining the {item_id} path parameter as a parameter as specifying it must be an integer. After that, we can define an optional query parameter called "name" that needs to either be a string, or bypassed and set to None.

```
def get_item(item_id: int, name: Optional[str] = None):
```

Then we'll use an if statement to check if that item_id we passed is in the inventory. If not, it will raise an exception that returns a 404 status code and the following message: "Item ID not found."

In order to do so, first we need to return to the top of our file and import HTTPException from fastAPI.

```
from fastapi import FastAPI, HTTPException
```

Then we can write the if statement.

```
    if item_id not in inventory:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=404, detail="Item ID not found.")
```

Then we do something similar for the query parameter. If the query parameter and the item_id combined does not return an item in the inventory, we will raise another 404 with the message "Item name not found."  

```
    if name and inventory[item_id].name != name:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=404, detail="Item name not found.")
```

Finally, if neither of those conditions are met, we will return the item_id.

```
    return inventory[item_id]
```

The finished endpoint looks like this:

```
@app.get("/get-item/{item_id}")
def get_item(item_id: int, name: Optional[str] = None):
    if item_id not in inventory:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=404, detail="Item ID not found.")
    if name and inventory[item_id].name != name:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=404, detail="Item name not found.")
    
    return inventory[item_id]
```

That's it for the GET method! Let's use the POST to create an item for our inventory.

```
@app.post("/create-item/{item_id}")
def create_item(item_id: int, item: Item):
    if item_id in inventory:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=400, detail="Item ID already exists")
    inventory[item_id] = item

    return inventory[item_id]
```

Once again, we will create a decorator for our app. This time, however, we are calling the POST method after the dot. After that, we'll give it a descriptive path name and pass item_id as a path parameter just like we did before.

```
@app.post("/create-item/{item_id}")
```

Afterwards, we create a function to create an item that takes in an int for an item id and an item of the Item class that we defined earlier.

```
def create_item(item_id: int, item: Item):
```

Then we check if the item id is in the inventory and raise an exception if it is.

```
    if item_id in inventory:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=400, detail="Item ID already exists")
```

If not, we update the empty inventory dictionary with the new item.

```
    inventory[item_id] = item
```

Finally, we return the inventory.

```
    return inventory[item_id]
```

We can use the PUT method to update the inventory.

```
@app.put("/update-item/{item_id}")
def update_item(item_id: int, item: Item):
    if item_id not in inventory:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=404, detail="Item ID does not exist.")
    # If name wasn't left blank, update name and so on...
    if item.name != None:
        inventory[item_id].name = item.name
    if item.price != None:
        inventory[item_id].price = item.price
    if item.description != None:
        inventory[item_id].description = item.description

    return inventory[item_id]
```

I won't break down the creation of the decorator or function again since it is very similar to what we have for POST. However, this endpoint has some notable differences. Since PUT updates an item by getting rid of it and creating a new item, we have to add in some checks to discover which item field the client updated. If the field in the request body is not equal to None, we update it.

```
    if item.name != None:
        inventory[item_id].name = item.name
    if item.price != None:
        inventory[item_id].price = item.price
    if item.description != None:
        inventory[item_id].description = item.description
```

That ensures that we will keep the old values if they do not specify new values for all three fields.

Finally, we will create an endpoint to remove items from our inventory using the DELETE method.

```
@app.delete("/delete-item/{item_id}")
def delete_item(item_id: int):
    if item_id not in inventory:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=404, detail="Item ID does not exist.")
    # Deletes the item from the item inventory dictionary, our data store
    del inventory[item_id]
    
    return {"Success": "Item deleted!"}
```

This endpoint is very straight forward. It takes in an item id, removes it from our inventory and displays a JSON message. Once again, we can write the message as a python dictionary and FastAPI will convert it to JSON for us.

```
return {"Success": "Item deleted!"}
```

That's it! The finished file should look like this:

```
from fastapi import FastAPI, HTTPException
from typing import Optional
from pydantic import BaseModel

# Initialize our API by creating an app object by calling the FastAPI constructor
app = FastAPI()

@app.get("/")
def read_root():
 return {"message": "Welcome to the app!"}

class Item(BaseModel):
    name: str
    price: float
    description: Optional[str] = None

# In-memory data store
inventory = {}

@app.get("/get-item/{item_id}")
def get_item(item_id: int, name: Optional[str] = None):
    if item_id not in inventory:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=404, detail="Item ID not found.")
    if name and inventory[item_id].name != name:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=404, detail="Item name not found.")
    
    return inventory[item_id]

@app.post("/create-item/{item_id}")
def create_item(item_id: int, item: Item):
    if item_id in inventory:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=400, detail="Item ID already exists")
    inventory[item_id] = item

    return inventory[item_id]

@app.put("/update-item/{item_id}")
def update_item(item_id: int, item: Item):
    if item_id not in inventory:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=404, detail="Item ID does not exist.")
    # If name wasn't left blank, update name and so on...
    if item.name != None:
        inventory[item_id].name = item.name
    if item.price != None:
        inventory[item_id].price = item.price
    if item.description != None:
        inventory[item_id].description = item.description

    return inventory[item_id]

@app.delete("/delete-item/{item_id}")
def delete_item(item_id: int):
    if item_id not in inventory:
        raise HTTPException(status_code=404, detail="Item ID does not exist.")
    # Deletes the item from the item inventory dictionary, our data store
    del inventory[item_id]
    
    return {"Success": "Item deleted!"}
```

Let's cover some background information we'll need to run our API.

• Starlette is a framework that handles communication tools between web servers and web apps\
• FastAPI is built on top of Starlette\
• It enhances Starlettes routes with data validation (pydantic) & API documentation (Swagger)\
• It runs FastAPI, takes HTTP requests from the client, and sends them to FastAPI\
• Uvicorn is the recommended web server to run FastAPI\

So we can run our API with: 

```
uvicorn file:app --reload
```

The --reload option enables hot reloading. That means our server will restart whenever we make changes to our file.

Finally, we can visit http://127.0.0.1:8000/docs to view our API documentation using Swagger UI, a data visualization tool for APIs. We defined our API documentation when we defined our endpoints. We can easily test if our implementation is correct using Swagger UI. 
